=head1 INTRO

Blizkost Perl5 <-> Parrot interoperability semantics

The idea here is that migrating data between the Perl5 dataspace and the Parrot
dataspace is essentially the same problem as Parrot to C, and we need the same
technology - a FFI.

=head1 PERL 5 FROM A PARROT PERSPECTIVE

The fundamental object in Perl 5 is the B<SV>.  A SV is a I<polymorphic
container>; it can hold a string, a floating point number, an integer, a
reference to another SV, a subroutine (not by reference), an array (not by
reference), a hash (not by reference), a file handle, a format (you don't want
to know), a symbol table entry (essentially a specialized hash mapping sigils
to SVs), or nothing at all.  These are not mutually exclusive.

SVs have several behavioral restrictions.  Most importantly, a SV which holds
an aggregate, cannot have ever held a different kind of data, and cannot change
to hold a different kind of data.  However, non-aggreggate containers can
change value type freely.

SVs can also I<have magic>, which is kindof like traits, but more restricted.
SVs can be tied, which is like magic, except when it's not.

SVs are not garbage collected, instead they are I<reference counted>.

Perl extensions extensively rely on these behavioral quirks of SVs, as does the
core, except the core also depends on representation.  I hold this responsible
for the death of ponie.

=head1 MAPPERS AND HANDLES

Blizkost relies on a number of B<mappers>.  A mapper is something that knows
how to take a PMC and make it look like an SV, or vice versa.  Mappers fall
into four groups, designated B<scalar export> (turns one PMC into one SV),
B<scalar import> (the reverse), B<list export> (turn a few PMCs into a few
SVs), and B<list import>.

Mappers are I<simply Parrot C<Callable>s> which operate on PMCs and SV handles,
so you can define your own if you want interesting semantics.  See
L</THE REGISTRY> below.

In order to implement the mappers, it is necessary to write code (in one or
both universes) which can handle objects in the opposite world.  For this
Blizkost provides B<handles> - two classes, C<perl5;Blizkost;PMC> and
C<parrot;Blizkost;SV> .  These classes do I<no semantic translation>; they
simply present an object-oriented interface to data objects in the other world,
while mediating garbage collection.

=head1 PREDEFINED MAPPERS

Several simple mappers are provided for you; most of them only operate on a
single type, so are only useful in the context of a user-defined mapper.  All
mappers are exported from C<parrot;Blizkost;Mappers>.

All mappers which copy values will set the copies to be read-only to catch
common aliasing errors.

Many of these functions are overloaded to handle both directions.  This means
that you don't have to remember confusing arcane terminology like "exporter".

All of them will generate Parrot exceptions on range check error.

=head2 intvalue

This I<scalar importer> will coerce the SV to an integer, and return a new PMC
containing a copy of the value.

This I<scalar exporter> will call get_integer on a PMC, and return a new SV
containing the integer value.

=head2 numvalue

Same as intvalue, except for floating point.

=head2 strvalue

Same as intvalue, but for strings.  Note that in Perl, string values are
logically immutable (although there are in-place optimizations for the case
where a string in memory is only held in one container).

=head2 scalarvalue

Combines intvalue, strvalue, and numvalue, and additionally will handle
"dualvar" objects such as Perl 5's C<$!> that have independant string and
number identities.

=head2 deeparray(CHILD)

Duplicates the immediate structure of the referent of a hash reference, or
object, using a child mapper to handle subobjects.  Uses the array interface on
whatever it is copying.

=head2 deephash(CHILD)

Same as deeparray, but using string keys.

=head2 proxyscalar

Creates a general scalar container, which is magically bound to the source
object, such that any changes in the destination are reflected to the source.
The Perl-side scalar cannot hold references.

=head2 proxyarray(CHILD)

Creates a positional aggregate bound to the source object, using the CHILD to
handle importing and exporting children.

=head2 proxyhash(CHILD[, KEYCHILD])

Creates a keyed aggregate.  KEYCHILD is used for SV-keyed tied hashes; if you
have one of these, you know.  If it is not provided, the string interface will
be used.

=head2 asref(CHILD)

When importing, automatically dereferences Perl-side references.  When
exporting, creates a new Perl-side reference to a value.  You need this if you
want to put aggregates into other aggregates or a parameter list.

=head2 vectorize(CHILD)

Turns a scalar importer/exporter into a list version which treats arguments
homogenously.

=head2 wrapper(ARGS, RESULTS)

Imports and exports subroutine values by creating a wrapper sub on the other
side.  Needs child I<list> mappers to handle boundary conversion.

=head2 objproxy(DEFARGS, DEFRES, {METHOD => [ARGS, RES]})

Creates an opaque proxy object, which relays only methods.  If some methods
need special treatment, they can be named.

=head2 default

This one combines wrapper, objproxy, deeparray, deephash, scalarvalue, and
asref in the most obvious way, attempting to do the Right Thing with all
values passed to it.

=head1 EXCEPTIONS

Attempting to use a Parrot continuation to exit the dynamic scope of a Perl 5
call won't do what you expect, unless you know how it's implemented, so don't
do that.

For actual exceptions, things are a bit easier.  First, Perl 5 does not support
non-fatal exceptions or resuming handlers.  If you throw a non-fatal exception
in Parrot code, it will be treated as unhandled and dropped on the floor after
it hits Perl 5.  Fatal exceptions will propagate into Perl 5 and unwind the
Perl stack; when this happens, the resume continuation will be erased, as it
is not possible to un-unwind the Perl 5 activation stack.

Exceptions generated from Parrot are represented by a
C<perl5;Blizkost;ParrotException> object while in Perl.  Exceptions generated
from Perl 5 are represented by a C<parrot;Blizkost;Perl5Exception> object while
in Parrot.

=head1 THE REGISTRY

When a value is imported from Perl 5 into Parrot, Blizkost consults an internal
table mapping symbol names to mapper functions called the B<registry>.  This
allows imports to I<just work>, even when C<default> doesn't do the right
thing.  An initial set of mappings is shipped with Blizkost (which is expected
to grow over time); if your favorite module is not listed, please submit a
patch, and use the hooks in C<parrot;Blizkost;Registry> in the mean time.

=head1 THE OTHER WAY

Blizkost provides a Perl 5 library which can be used to instantiate a Parrot
interpreter if needed and access Parrot modules.  In general this is a bit
easier than the forward direction, as Parrot subs carry more metadata and
Parrot values are less overloaded; you should very rarely need to write custom
marshalling code.

A C<parrot> pragmatic module is provided to enable cross-language import.

    use parrot java => java.util.zip.ZipInputStream;

    ZipInputStream->new(...)

=cut

vim: ft=pod
